                    ITCS 6169/8169 - Computer Vision
                                  Assignment 1: The CNN Challenge



                              Due: September 25, 2026, 11:59 PM EDT


1    The Challenge
Imagine that you have just joined the computer vision team at Company XYZ as an Applied Research
Scientist (PhD students) or Research Intern (Masters students). Your first task sounds simple:
                 Build the best image classifier you can from a small dataset.
    You are given only 2,400 training images belonging to 16 classes. The dataset is available here:
                                           Download Dataset
Your objective is to obtain the highest possible classification accuracy while developing a solution that
is technically sound, reproducible, and computationally reasonable. There is deliberately no step-by-step
recipe. You will need to make decisions about architecture, augmentation, optimization, regularization,
validation, and training strategy. In this course, we will begin directly with training convolutional neural
networks.


2    Learning Objective
The objective of this assignment is not simply to obtain a high accuracy number. By completing
the assignment, you should demonstrate that you can:
 • design and train a modern CNN-based image recognition system;
 • reason about training when labeled data are limited;
 • diagnose underfitting, overfitting, and optimization problems;
 • conduct controlled experiments rather than randomly changing hyperparameters;
 • use modern AI coding tools effectively while retaining ownership of the scientific and engineering
   decisions;
 • maintain a reproducible research codebase using GitHub.


3    CNN Rules
The primary model in this assignment must be based on a convolutional neural network. You may
use architectures such as ResNet, ResNeXt, DenseNet, EfficientNet, ConvNeXt, MobileNet, or a CNN
architecture designed by you. You may modify the architecture, loss function, augmentation pipeline,
optimizer, learning-rate schedule, regularization strategy, or training procedure. Pretrained CNNs are
allowed, but you must clearly state what was pretrained, on which dataset, and which parameters were
fine-tuned. For this assignment, the following may not be used as the primary classifier:

                                                     1
 • CLIP or other vision-language models;
 • DINO/DINOv2 or similar foundation-model embeddings;
 • Vision Transformers used as the primary architecture;
 • multimodal large language models or VLM APIs for classifying the test images.
We will study these models later in the course. Assignment 1 is intentionally about understanding CNN
training.


4    AI Coding Tools: Required
It is 2026. Modern engineers and researchers routinely work with AI coding assistants. Therefore, using
an AI coding tool is required for this assignment. Examples include ChatGPT, Codex, GitHub
Copilot, Claude Code, Gemini, Cursor, or comparable tools. However,

    AI is your pair programmer, not your research scientist.
    You may ask AI to generate boilerplate, implement an augmentation, debug an error, refactor
    code, explain PyTorch functionality, create plotting utilities, or suggest experiments. You are
    responsible for deciding what experiments should be run, why they should be run,
    whether the generated code is correct, and what conclusions can be drawn from the
    results.

You must be able to explain every important component of your final system. Statements such as
“the AI suggested this architecture” or “ChatGPT gave me these hyperparameters” are not scientific
justification.

Required AI Reflection
Create a section called AI USAGE.md in your GitHub repository containing:
 • which AI coding tool(s) you used;
 • 3–5 representative examples of how AI assisted you;
 • at least one example where the AI produced an incorrect, ineffective, or questionable suggestion;
 • how you verified or modified the AI-generated solution;
 • one important experimental or architectural decision that you made rather than simply accepting the
   AI recommendation.
You do not need to provide every prompt you used. The objective is to demonstrate thoughtful use of
AI rather than a transcript of your interaction with it.


5    The Experimental Process
Treat this assignment like a small research project. Begin with a reasonable CNN baseline. Once the
baseline is working, identify its weaknesses and improve it through controlled experimentation. Possible
questions include:
 • Is the model overfitting?
 • Would stronger augmentation help?
 • Does model capacity matter?

                                                   2
 • Does ImageNet initialization help substantially?
 • Which optimizer or learning-rate schedule works best?
 • Does label smoothing improve generalization?
 • Does weight decay matter?
 • Are some classes significantly more difficult than others?
 • Does increasing image resolution help enough to justify the additional computation?
 • Can a smaller model perform almost as well as a much larger model?
You are not expected to test everything. Good experimental reasoning is more important than
running a very large number of experiments. Keep track of your experiments. Your final report should
tell a coherent story about how your system evolved.


6    What to Submit
Submit a maximum two-page PDF report containing a link to your GitHub repository. The two-page
limit does not include references. Your report should address the following.

1. Final Result
Clearly report your best test-set accuracy. Also report your validation strategy and the validation ac-
curacy corresponding to the selected model. Include the GitHub link containing the exact code and
checkpoint used to generate your final prediction.

2. Your Secret Recipe
Describe the final system concisely. Relevant details may include:
 • CNN architecture;
 • pretrained initialization, if any;
 • input resolution;
 • optimizer and learning rate;
 • learning-rate schedule;
 • batch size and number of epochs;
 • regularization;
 • data augmentation;
 • loss function;
 • model selection strategy;
 • any additional training tricks.
Do not simply list settings. Explain which choices mattered.




                                                      3
3. Experimental Journey
Show evidence that your final system resulted from experimentation rather than a single training run.
Include a compact table similar to the following:

                        Experiment             Validation Acc.     Observation
                        Baseline CNN                    –                –
                        + Augmentation                  –                –
                        + Training Strategy             –                –
                        Final Model                     –                –

You do not need to report every failed experiment. Select the experiments that best explain the devel-
opment of your final solution.

4. Failure Analysis
Pick at least one thing that did not work as expected. Explain:
 • what you tried;
 • why you thought it might work;
 • what happened;
 • what you learned from the result.
A well-analyzed failed experiment can be more valuable than another 0.5% improvement in accuracy.

5. AI + Human
Briefly discuss one example in which an AI coding assistant helped you and one example where your
judgment was necessary to improve, correct, or reject its suggestion. Detailed documentation
should be placed in AI USAGE.md; only the key observation belongs in the report.


7    GitHub Requirements
All assignments must be maintained using GitHub. Your repository must contain:
 • a clear README.md;
 • training code;
 • inference/evaluation code;
 • dependency or environment information;
 • instructions for reproducing your result;
 • the final model checkpoint, or a link to the checkpoint;
 • AI USAGE.md;
 • a meaningful Git commit history showing the development of the project.
Do not upload the entire project as one commit immediately before the deadline. Your code should allow
me to reproduce your reported result without rewriting your program. Large checkpoints may be stored
using Google Drive, Hugging Face, GitHub Releases, or another suitable hosting service. You may keep
the repository private during the assignment. If it is private, make sure the instructor have access when
the assignment is submitted.

                                                    4
8    Reproducibility
Your repository should make it possible to run commands similar to:

python train.py --config configs/best.yaml
python evaluate.py --checkpoint <checkpoint>

The exact interface is up to you. Whenever possible, specify random seeds and report the versions of
important software packages. PyTorch is recommended.


9    Resources
You may use Google Colab, the Educational Cluster, or other computing resources legally available to
you. If you require access to the Educational Cluster, contact me. You are responsible for complying
with the policies of any external GPU or cloud resource you use. You may consult:
 • research papers;
 • PyTorch documentation;
 • GitHub repositories;
 • Stack Overflow and technical forums;
 • tutorials and blogs;
 • AI coding assistants.
Using external resources is part of modern research and engineering. However, you are responsible
for understanding, verifying, and adapting anything that enters your final solution.


10    Grading
The assignment will be graded according to the following criteria:

                           Component                                  Weight
                           Classification performance                  30%
                           Experimental reasoning and analysis         25%
                           Model/training design                       20%
                           Reproducibility and GitHub quality          15%
                           Responsible and thoughtful AI-tool usage    10%

Accuracy matters, but the highest accuracy does not automatically receive the highest grade. A
slightly lower-performing solution supported by careful experimentation and strong analysis may receive
a higher grade than a poorly understood collection of tricks. A starter codebase achieving less than
approximately 50% accuracy will be provided. You are expected to substantially improve upon this
baseline.


11    The Leaderboard
Friendly competition is encouraged. We will maintain an informal leaderboard based on test accuracy.
Recognition will be given for:


                                                   5
 • Best Accuracy;
 • Best Accuracy–Efficiency Tradeoff ;
 • Most Interesting Experimental Finding.
The leaderboard is intended to make experimentation fun; it does not replace the grading rubric.


12    Academic Integrity and Collaboration
You are encouraged to discuss general ideas with classmates, including architectures, optimization con-
cepts, debugging strategies, and relevant papers. However, your implementation, experiments, analysis,
report, and GitHub repository must be your own. Do not share code, checkpoints, detailed hyperpa-
rameter configurations, or test predictions with other students before the deadline. AI-generated code is
not exempt from this requirement. If two students independently ask an AI system for code, each
student remains responsible for adapting, understanding, testing, and integrating that code into their
own solution. The instructor may ask you to explain any component of your submitted system. Inability
to explain important parts of the submitted code may affect the grade.


13    Submission
The deadline is:

                              September 25, 2026 at 11:59 PM EDT

Submit a single PDF containing your two-page report and a working link to your GitHub repository.
Before submitting, ask yourself:

                     If I gave this repository to another computer vision researcher,
                      could they understand what I tried and reproduce my result?

If the answer is yes, you are ready to submit.


             Good luck, and have fun training your first model of the semester!




                                                    6
